---SWETE-PAGE---
[BODY]
vii

are severally derived. The New Testament Canticles and the ὕμνος ἐωθινός
have been allowed to retain the place which they hold in the Psalter of
Codex A.

We proceed to give some account of MSS. not previously described and
used in the apparatus of the present volume.

CODEX MARCIANUS, Vat. Gr. 2125.

Contains at present 410 leaves of thin vellum, measuring 11 1/2 by 7 inches, written
in single columns of 31 lines, each line consisting of 24 to 30 letters. The first 12
leaves, which were not part of the original MS., are occupied by (1) an extract from
the Synopsis printed among the works of St Athanasius, here attributed to
Eusebius; (2) extracts from the Lives of the Prophets which appear in the
edition of Epiphanius. The Prophets follow in the first hand, and in the order of
Cod. B (i.e. the order in which they are printed in the present edition).

In its original form the MS. was without interlinear or marginal additions,
except a few corrections by the διορθωτής and the liturgical marks inserted in its
text. Neither breathings nor accents seem to have been added by the first hand.
Thus MS. was written in Egypt, and, in the judgement of certain, not later
than the sixth century. The character, size simple, firm, and free, with the
exception of θ, ξ, ψ, which are narrow, after the manner of the later century; but
this peculiarity does not, as Ceriani has shown, in the case of an Egyptian MS.
require us to assign a later date.

The history of the MS. is of much interest. It appears to have remained
in Egypt until after the 7th century, and all the additions and corrections in
uncial writing are by Egyptian hands. From Egypt it passed into South
Italy, probably before the 13th century, and there the patristic scholia and
a few readings in the text and margin, signalised by a preliminary γράφεται,
seem to have been added in cent. XIII. From South Italy it was carried,
perhaps by some Norman or French hand, into France, where it found a
home in the Abbey of St Denys, near Paris. While in Italy the codex had
received various Latin notes, chiefly renderings from the Vulgate and other
elucidations of the Greek text; and the process of annotation in Latin was
continued after its arrival in France. In the 16th century the book passed
out of the possession of the monks of St Denys and became the property first
of René Maréchal (Renatus Maréshalis Bosmoriens²), after whom it is still
named; and subsequently of Cardinal François Rochefoucauld, to whom it
belonged about A.D. 1636. The Cardinal presented it to the Jesuit College of

[APPARATUS]
Ceriani, monum. sacra et profana, tom.
ix. p. 5, e tam multa diligentium fortunam
proprie est adtingentium papyrum in un-
ciale Musci Britannici folium codex
contu Patris Sophiae, quem Hyvernat fere
saec. VI dicit, licet crassiori typo scripturae.

Holmes and Parsons, tomus Marc. latinus
eius praemisse, recte.
Cf. Omont, Evangiles de St Denis,
préface, B. Montfaucon in Mus. it. p. 11, K. p.
179, p. 74.

6 2
---END-PAGE---