---GREEK-EXTRA-PAGE---
[RUNNING HEAD]
THE PRAYER OF MANASSES 10-13

[BODY]
Neither have I any respite:
Because I provoked thy wrath, and did that which was evil in thy sight.
*I did not do thy will, neither kept I thy commandments:*
I set up abominations, and multiplied detestable things.
11 And now I bow the knee of mine heart, beseeching thee of thy gracious goodness.
12 I have sinned, O Lord, I have sinned,
And I acknowledge mine iniquities.
13 But, I humbly beseech thee,
Forgive me, O Lord, forgive me,

[APPARATUS]
εις το . . . ανεσις om. Const. Apost. *μη ποιησας το θελημα σου και φυλαξας τα προσταγματα σου* insert T and Lat. but not
Moz. στησας . . . προσοχθισματα om. T 11. καρδιας : + μου T, Const. Apost. Lat. 12. εγω γινωσκω
Codd. A T, Const. Apost., ed. Fritzsche : αναγινωσκω Vulgo : Lat., Moz. agnosco 13. αιτουμαι . . . ανες μοι : om. Moz. :

[FOOTNOTES]
κατακαμπτ. Lat. ‘incurvatus sum’. This verb is rare in the LXX, Ps. xxxvii. 6, lvi. (lvii.) 6; cf. Symmachus Ps. xli. (xlii.) 6, xliii. (xliv.) 26.
πολλῷ δεσμῷ σιδηρῷ. Latin ‘multo vinculo ferreo’. Cf. 2 Chron. xxxiii. 11: ‘The captains of the king of Assyria . . . took Manasseh in chains [Or, *with hooks*], and bound him with fetters, and carried him to Babylon.’ There is no sufficient reason to explain, as Zöckler and Ball, this sentence metaphorically of sin and its chains, like Ps. cvii. 10, ‘being bound in affliction and iron.’ The whole context of this verse is occupied, not with the iniquities that produced the punishment, but with the penalty, of a quite real and overwhelming kind, which had befallen the speaker. Again, the metaphorical use of iron chains applied to sin is not a common one; and there is nothing in the character of the Prayer which would favour the theory of a metaphorical use of these simple words.
The precise meaning of πολλῷ is doubtful; it may either be rendered as if it were the same as πολλοῖς δεσμοῖς, or the singular number may denote ‘a weighty chain’. For the use of πολύς with a singular substantive—most of the examples usually given are with an abstract noun—cf. *v.* 14 κατὰ τὸ πολὺ ἔλεός σου.
εἰς τὸ ἀνανεῦσαί με κτλ. This is the most difficult expression in the whole Prayer, and the difficulty has given rise to the variety in the readings.
ἀνανεύειν in the LXX is employed to translate מֵאֵן and נוּא (Hiph.) in the sense of ‘to refuse’: cf. Exod. xxii. 17; Num. xxx. 6; Neh. ix. 17. Here, however, it is used in a sense that represents the physical motion of the verb (νεύειν) and the preposition (ἀνά), and means ‘to incline upward’, as Ps. xl. 12, ‘so that I am not able to look up.’ We have, therefore, three alternative renderings: (1) Fritzsche, ‘so that I shake (my head) over my sins’ (cf. Polyb. xviii. 13. 3 ἀνανενευκώς = ‘with the head up’; Dionys. Areop.; Basil, Ps. vii, p. 140; Chrys. *De Zelo et Piet.* (ap. Suicer.). (2) εἰς τό with inf., equivalent to τοῦ with inf. (= Hebr. מִן with inf.) = ‘more bowed down . . . than to lift up *my head*, because of my sins’, in the sense of ‘bowed down . . . so that I cannot lift up my head, or look upwards’. This gives a good sense, but grammatically it is a harsh construction. (3) εἰς τὸ μὴ ἀνανεῦσαι τὴν κεφαλήν, as Cod. T, ‘so that I cannot lift up my head.’ This text is evidently emendational. The insertion of the μή gives the same sense as No. 2. So Latin, ‘ut non possim attollere caput meum.’ The omission of the whole line, εἰς τὸ . . . ἄνεσις, in Const. Apost. may have been due to the obscurity of the meaning; but see note on *vv.* 9, 10 above.
ἄνεσις. Latin ‘respiratio’, in the sense of ‘release’, or ‘cessation’, or ‘relief’. Cf. LXX in 2 Chron. xxxiii. 15; 1 Esdras iv. 62; 2 Esdras iv. 22. In the N. T. it occurs of St. Paul in prison, Acts xxiv. 23. Cf. 2 Cor. vii. 5.
παρώργισα. The verb παροργίζω, ‘to anger’, is of frequent occurrence in LXX with a personal object; e. g. Judges ii. 12 παρώργισαν τὸν κύριον. But there is no instance in the LXX of the phrase here used, παροργίζειν τὸν θυμόν τινος.
The line μὴ ποιήσας . . . τὰ προστάγματά σου added by Codex Turicensis, and in the Latin version, ‘non feci voluntatem tuam et mandata tua non custodivi,’ seems certainly to be a gloss, expanding the words τὸ πονηρὸν ἐνώπιόν σου ἐποίησα. It adds nothing to the sense of the verse, it overloads the arrangement of the lines, it places μὴ ποιήσας immediately after ἐποίησα, and interposes a general negative between the assertion of wicked action (τὸ πονηρὸν ἐνώπιόν σου ἐποίησα) and the statement of its most conspicuous instance of enormity. The line should not, therefore, be included in the text.
στήσας βδελύγματα κτλ. Latin, ‘statui abominationes et multiplicavi offensiones.’ Mozarabic, ‘Statuens abominationes et multiplicans odiositates.’ βδέλυγμα is the usual rendering in the LXX for תּוֹעֵבָה ‘abomination’. Cf. 2 Kings xxi. 2: ‘And he (Manasseh) did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord, after the abominations of the heathen.’ προσοχθίσματα is the word used for ‘the abomination’ (שִׁקּוּץ) of the Zidonians and of Moab in 2 Kings xxiii. 13 τῇ Ἀστάρτῃ προσοχθίσματι Σιδωνίων καὶ τῷ Χαμὼς προσοχθίσματι Μωὰβ καὶ τῷ Μολχὸλ βδελύγματι υἱῶν Ἀμμών. On the outrages committed by Manasseh upon the worship of Jehovah and upon the Temple at Jerusalem see 2 Chron. xxxiii. 1–9.
11. καὶ νῦν κτλ. The confession is complete; the entreaty for compassion now begins.
κλίνω γόνυ καρδίας. In the LXX κάμπτω is the regular verb to be used with τὰ γόνατα. With κλίνω we find another construction in 2 Esdras ix. 5 κλίνω ἐπὶ τὰ γόνατά μου. The heart of the suppliant is here represented as a person kneeling. For this personification of the heart cf. Rom. ii. 29, ‘circumcision is that of the heart.’ The teaching of the prophet Joel is perhaps still influencing the writer: ‘Rend your heart, and not your garments’ (Joel ii. 13).
δεόμενος τῆς παρὰ σοῦ χρηστότητος, i. e. begging for the kindness which continually proceeds from thee. It is more than τῆς χρηστότητός σου, while the Latin ‘precans a te bonitatem’ fails to reproduce the Greek idiom.
12. ἡμάρτηκα. The perf. tense gives the sense of the continued result of the sin, ‘I have sinned, and am in a state of sin.’ This is a different shade of thought from that of the aorist ἥμαρτον (*v.* 9). For this acknowledgement of sin compare the cases of Balaam, Num. xxii. 34; Saul, 1 Sam. xv. 24, xxvi. 21; David, 2 Sam. xii. 13.
ἐγώ. Emphatic: ‘I—the guilty one—am alone cognizant of my guilt, and therefore alone can perceive and acknowledge my transgression.’
γινώσκω. Latin ‘agnosco’. Cf. Ps. l. (li.) 5 ‘iniquitatem meam ego cognosco’. In this passage some editions have ἀναγινώσκω. Cf. Ps. xix. 12: ‘Who can discern his errors?’
13. αἰτοῦμαι. The reading ἀλλ’, which is found in Cod. T and Const. Apost., expresses the fresh departure made at this point in the Prayer: ‘Nevertheless, in spite of my sinfulness, I beseech,’ &c. Latin, ‘quare peto rogans te.’
623
---END-PAGE---