       —S




                                      I.
     Irenzeus and others record that John the Divine and Apostle survived
until the times of Trajan; after which time Papias of Hierapolis and
Polycarp,   bishop of Smyrna, his hearers, became well known.
                  Eusebius   Chronicon (Syncell. 655, 14) for Olymp. 220.



                                      II,
  _ At this time flourished in Asia Polycarp, a disciple of the Apostles, who
   d ert            encore of,the,church, inSexyres, ot the hawts. 96
      J     es and ministers of the Lord. At which time Papias, who was
        also bishop of the diocese of Hierapolis, became distinguished.
                                        Eusesius ‘ist. Eccl. iii. 36, 1. 2.



                                     III.
     Five books of Papias are extant, which bear the title Expositions of
Oracles of the Lord. Of these Irenzus also makes mention as the only
      ‘$ written by him, in the following words: ‘These things Papias, who
  jas a hearer of John and a companion of Polycarp, an ancient worthy,
 vitnesseth in writingin the fourth of hisbooks.     For there are five books
            d by him.’ So far Irenzus.
    ‘YetPapias himself, in the preface to his discourses, certainly does not
           that he himself was a hearer and eye-witness of the holy Apostles,
   the shows,bythelanguage which he uses, that he received the matters
  f the faith from those who were their friends :—
   J‘But I will not scruple also to give a place for you along
 vith my interpretations to everything that I learnt carefully and
 emembered carefully in time past from the elders, guaranteeing
 t; truth. For, unlike the many, I did not take pleasure in
528               THE FRAGMENTS              OF PAPIAS.                       3
those who have so very much to say, but in those who teach the
truth; nor in those who relate foreign commandments, but in
those (who record) such as were given from the Lord to                       the
Faith, and are derived from the Truth itself. And again,
any occasion when a person came (in my way) who had been a
follower of the Elders, I would inquire about the discourses of
the elders—what was said by Andrew, or by Peter, or by Philip, |
or by Thomas or James, or by John or Matthew or any other of
the Lord’s disciples, and what Aristion and the Elder John, the
disciples of the Lord, say. For I did not think that I could
get so much profit from the contents of books as from the utter-
ances of a living and abiding voice.
    Here it is worth while to observe that he twice enumerates the name of
John. The first he mentions in connexion with Peter and James and ©
Matthew and the rest of the Apostles, evidently meaning the Evangelist,
but the other John he mentions after an interval and classes with others
outside the number of the Apostles, placing Aristion before him, and he
distinctly calls him an Elder.      So that he hereby makes it quite evident —
that their statement is true who say that there were two persons of that
name in Asia, and that there are two tombs in Ephesus, each of which even
now is called (the tomb) of John.    And it is important to notice this; for it
is probable that it was the second, if one will not admit that it was the first,
who saw the Revelation which is ascribed by name to John. And Papias,
of whom we are now speaking, confesses that he had received the words of
the Apostles from those who had followed them, but says that he was him-
self a hearer of Aristion and the Elder John. At all events he mentions
them frequently by name, and besides records their traditions in his writings.
So much for these points which I trust have not been uselessly adduced.
    It is worth while however to add to the words of Papias given above”
other passages from him, in which he records some other wonderful       events”
likewise, as having come down to him by tradition. That Philip the Apostle
resided in Hierapolis with his daughters has been already stated ;but how
Papias, their contemporary, relates that he had heard a marvellous tale from
the daughters of Philip, must be noted here. For he relates that in his tim
a man rose from the dead, and again he gives another wonderful story
about Justus who was surnamed Barsabas, how that he drank a deadh
poison, and yet, by the grace of the Lord, suffered no inconvenience.         Of
this Justus the Book of the Acts records that after the ascension of the
Saviour the holy Apostles put him forward with Matthias, and prayed for the
(right) choice, in place of the traitor Judas, that should make their number       |
complete.   The passage is somewhat      as follows;   ‘And they put       wara
two, Foseph, called Barsabas, who was surnamed Fustus, and Matthias ; and
                    THE     FRAGMENTS         OF PAPIAS.                   529
 they prayed, and said’ ‘The same writer has recorded other notices as
 having come down to him from oral tradition, certain strange parables of
the Saviour and teachings of His, and some other statements of a rather
 mythical character. Among which he says that there will be a period of
 Some ten thousand years after the resurrection, and that the kingdom of
‘Christ will be set up in material form on this earth. These ideas I suppose
he got through a misunderstanding of the apostolic accounts, not perceiving
       the things recorded there in figures were spoken by them mystically.
   ‘or he evidently was a man of very mean capacity,   as one may say judging
 from his own statements: yet it was owing to him that so many church
fathers after him adopted a like opinion, urging in their own support the
antiquity of the man, as for instance Irenwus and whoever else they were
who declared that they held like views. Papias also gives in his own work
other accounts of the words of the Lord on the authority of Aristion who
has been mentioned above, and traditions of the Elder John. To these
we refer the curious, and for our present purpose we will merely add to his
words, which have been quoted above, a tradition, which has been set forth
through these sources concerning Mark who wrote the Gospel :—
     And the Elder said this also: Mark, having become the
interpreter of Peter, wrote down accurately everything that
  e remembered, without however recording in order what was
either said or done by Christ. For neither did he hear the
Lord, nor did he follow Him; but afterwards, as I said,
 (attended) Peter, who adapted his instructions to the needs
(of his hearers) but had no design of giving a connected account
   f the Lord’s oracles. So then Mark made no mistake, while
     thus wrote down some things as he remembered them; for
      made it his one care not to omit anything that he heard, or
     set down any false statement therein.
  _ Such then is the account given by Papias concerning Mark.         But con-
    ning Matthew, the following statement is made (by him) :
 _     So then Matthew          composed     the oracles in the Hebrew
     nguage, and each one interpreted them as he could.
      The same writer employed testimonies from the First Epistle of John,
     j likewise from that of Peter.   And he has related another story about a
      man   accused of many sins before the Lord, which the Gospel according

                                             Eusesius Hist. Ecel. iii. 39.




        AP. FATH.                                                     34
530              THE     FRAGMENTS          OF       PAPIAS.

                                     IV.
   And they went every man unto his own house; but Jesus |
went unto the mount of Olives. And early in the morning He ~
came   again unto the temple, [and all the people came unto
Him;    and He sat down, and taught them].                 And   the Scribes
and the Pharisees bring a woman taken in adultery; and having
set her in the midst, they say unto Him, Master, this woman
hath been taken in adultery, in the very act. Now in the law
Moses commanded [us] to stone such: what then sayest thou?
[And this they said, tempting Him, that they might have
(whereof) to accuse Him.] But Jesus stooped down, and with
His finger wrote on the ground. But when they continued ask-
ing [Him], He lifted up Himself, and said [unto them], He that —
is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her.
And again He stooped down, and wrote on the ground. And
they, when they heard it, went out one by one, beginning from
the eldest: and He was left alone, and the woman, where she
was, in the midst. And Jesus lifted up Himself, and said unto
her, Woman, where are they?                Did no man condemn thee?
And she said, No man, Lord. And Jesus said, Neither do                             I
condemn thee: go thy way; from henceforth sin no more.
                        PERICOPE ADULTERAE;          see Westcott and Hort
                            The New     Testament in the Original Greek
                            I. p. 241, 11. pp. 82sq, 91; Lightfoot Essays
                            on Supernatural Religion p. 203 sq-

                                      V.
   Papias, bishop of Hierapolis, who was a disciple of John the Divine, ar
a companion of Polycarp, wrote five books of Oracles of the Lord, w
when giving a list of the Apostles, after Peter and John, Philip and Thoma
and Matthew he included among the disciples of the Lord Aristion ar
second John, whom also he called ‘The Elder.’ [He says] that some
that this John is the author of the two short and catholic Epistles, c
are published in the name of John; and he gives as the reason that. th
primitive (fathers) only accept the first epistle.     Some too have    wron
considered the Apocalypse also to be his (ie. the Elder John’s)                 wor
Papias too is in error about the Millennium, and from him Irenzus              also.
Papias in his second book says that John the Divine and James his broth
                          THE    FRAGMENTS         OF PAPIAS.                      531
were killed by the Jews.          The aforesaid Papias stated on the authority of the
daughters of Philip that Barsabas, who is also called Justus, when challenged
by the unbelievers drank serpent’s poison in the name of the Lord, and was
shielded  from all harm. He makes also other marvellous statements, and
particularly about the mother of Manaim who was raised from the dead.
As for those who were raised from the dead by Christ, (he states) that they
 survived till the time of Hadrian.
-                                   PHILIPPUS OF SIDE (?) Afist. Christ.

                                            Vi.
       After Domitian Nerva reigned one year, who recalled John from the
‘sland (i.e. Patmos), and allowed him to dwell in Ephesus. He was at that
time the sole survivor of the twelve Apostles, and after writing his Gospel
received the honour of martyrdom. For Papias, bishop of Hierapolis, who
was an eye-witness of him, in the second book of the Oracles of the Lord
says that he was killed by the Jews, and thereby evidently fulfilled, together
with his brother, Christ’s prophecy concerning them, and their own confession
‘and undertaking on His behalf. For when the Lord said to them; Are ye
able to drink of the cup that I drink of?, and they readily assented and
agreed, He said; My cup shallye drink,       and with the baptism that    I am
      plized   shallye be baptised.     And reasonably so, for it is impossible for
God to lie.            So too the learned Origen affirms in his interpretation of
S.     Matthew’s Gospel that John was martyred, declaring that he had learnt
the     fact from the successors of the Apostles.      And indeed the well-informed
Eusebius           also in his Ecclesiastical History says ; ‘Thomas received by lot
Parthia,       but John, Asia, where also he made his residence and died at
     “phesus   ?


                                           GEORGIUS   HAMARTOLUS      Chronicon.

                                            VIL.
      Papias, a hearer of John, (and) bishop of Hierapolis in Asia, wrote only
five books, which he entitled An Exposition of Discourses of the Lord.
 Wherein, when he asserts in his preface that he is not following pro-
    iscuous  statements, but has the Apostles as his authorities, he says:—
         I used to inquire what had been said by Andrew, or by
       ter, or by Philip, or by Thomas or James, or by John or
      Matthew or any other of the Lord’s disciples, and what Aristion
      ind the Elder John, the disciples of the Lord, were saying.
      for books to read do not profit me so much as the living
      yoice clearly sounding up to the present day in (the persons of)
           authors,
                                                                         34—2
532                  THE FRAGMENTS OF PAPIAS.
   From which it is clear that in his list of names itself there is one John
who is reckoned among the Apostles, and another the Elder John, whom he
enumerates after Aristion. We have mentioned this fact on account of the
statement made above, which we have recorded on the authority of              very —
many, that the two later epistles of John are not (the work) of the Apostle, but
of the Elder. This (Papias) is said to have promulgated the Jewish tradi-
tion of a Millennium, and he is followed by Irenzus, Apollinarius and the
others, who say that after the resurrection the Lord will reign in the flesh
with the saints.
                                                 JEROME de vir. zllust. 18.

                                     VIIl.
    Further a false rumour has reached me that the books of Josephus and —
the writings of Papias and Polycarp have been translated by me; but I have
neither leisure nor strength to render such works as these with ‘correspond
ing elegance into another tongue.
                                JEROME ad Lucinium Epist. 71-(28) c. 5.

                                       IX.
    Irenzeus, a disciple of Papias who was a hearer of John the Eva
relates.                                                                  —
                                JEROME ad Theodoram Epist. 75 (29) ¢. 3.

                                     X.
    With regard however to the inspiration of the book (i.e. the Apocal

mean, the Divine) and Cyril, and men of an older generation as well, Pz
Irenzeus, Methodius and Hippolytus, bear testimony to its genuineness.
                        ANDREAS OF C#SAREA preface to the Apocalypse.

                                      XI.
    But thus says Papias, (1 quote him) word for word :—                       4
    To some of them, clearly the angels which at first were holy, He
gave dominion also over the arrangement of the universe,                       ar
He commissioned them to exercise their dominion well.
    And he says next :—
    But it so befel that their array came to nought; for the gre:
dragon, the old serpent, who is also called Satan and the devi
was cast down, yea, and was cast down to the earth, he and h
angels.                                                              1a       ee
                   ANDREAS   OF CASAREA      in Afpocalypsin c. 34 serm. 12.
                   THE     FRAGMENTS          OF PAPIAS.                    533

                                      XII.
     Taking their start from Papias the great, of Hierapolis, the disciple of the
Apostle who leaned on Christ’s bosom, and Clement, Pantanus the priest of
the Alexandrians and Ammonius, the great scholar, those ancient and first
 expositors who agree with each other in understanding all the work of the
 six days (as referring) to Christ and His Church.
                  ANASTASIUS OF SINAI Contempl. Anagog. in Hexaém. i.

                                      XIII.
      So then the more ancient expositors of the churches, I mean Philo,
_ the philosopher, and contemporary of the Apostles, and the famous Papias
_of Hierapolis, the disciple of John the Evangelist...and their associates,
  interpreted the sayings about Paradise spiritually, and referred them to the
  Church of Christ.
                ANASTASIUS OF SINAI Contempl. Anagog. in Hexaém. vii.

                                      XIV.
     The blessing thus foretold belongs undoubtedly to the times of the
 Kingdom, when the righteous shall rise from the dead and reign, when too
 creation renewed and freed from bondage shall produce a wealth of food of
 all kinds from the dew of heaven and from the fatness of the earth; as the
 elders, who saw John the disciple of the Lord, relate, that they had heard
 from him, how the Lord used to teach concerning those times, and to say,
     The days will come, in which vines shall grow, each having ten
thousand shoots, and on each shoot ten thousand branches, and
 on each branch again ten thousand twigs, and on each twig ten
 thousand clusters, and on each cluster ten thousand grapes, and
 each grape when pressed shall yield five-and-twenty measures
  of wine.    And when any of the saints shall have taken hold of
   ne of their clusters, another shall cry, I am a better cluster;
 take me, bless the Lord through me.             Likewise also a grain of
 wheat shall produce ten thousand heads, and every head shall
  lave ten thousand grains, and every grain ten pounds of fine
     our, bright and clean, and the other fruits, seeds and the grass
 shall produce in similar proportions, and all the animals, using
 these    fruits which are products of the soil, shall become in their
  urn peaceable and harmonious, obedient to man in all subjection.
         : things Papias,
                      who was a hearer of John and a companion of Poly-
534                 THE FRAGMENTS OF PAPIAS.
carp, an ancient worthy, witnesseth in writing in the fourth of his books, forbt:
there are five books composed by him. And he added, saying,
      But these things are credible to them that believe.                And :
when Judas the traitor did not believe, and asked, How                   shall —
such growths be accomplished by the Lord ? he relates that the
Lord said, They shall see, who shall come to these (times).
                                                IRENZUS Haer. v. 33- 3) 4

                                      XV.
    Those who practised guilelessness towards God they used to call
children, as Papias also shows in the first book of the Expositions of the |
Lord, and Clement of Alexandria in the Paedagogue.
             MAXIMUS THE CONFESSOR Schol. in libr. Dionys. Areopag.
                                  de eccl, hierarch. c. 2.

                                     XVI.
    This he says, darkly indicating, I suppose, Papias of Hierapolis in Asia,
who was a bishop at that time and flourished in the days of the holy
Evangelist John.     For this Papias in the fourth book of his Dominical          —
Expositions mentioned viands among the sources of delights in the resurrec- _
tion....   And Irenzeus of Lyons says the same thing in his fifth book against —
heresies, and produces in support of his statements the aforesaid Papias.     —
            MAXIMUS THE CONFESSOR Schol. in libr. Dionys. Areopag.
                                  de eccl. hierarch. c. 7.

                                    XVII.
    Nor again (does Stephanus follow) Papias, the bishop and martyr of
Hierapolis, nor Irenzeus, the holy bishop of Lyons, when they say that the
kingdom of heaven will consist in enjoyment of certain material foods.
                     PHOTIUS Aibliotheca 232, on Stephanus Gobarus.

                                   XVIII.
    Apollinarius,   ‘Judas did not die by hanging, but lived on, having been
cut down before he was suffocated. And the Acts of the Apostles show this,
that falling headlonghe burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed
out, This fact is related more clearly by Papias, the disciple of John, in the
fourth (book) of the Exposition of the Oracles of the Lord as follows :—
    Judas walked about in this world a terrible example of impiety; _
his flesh swollen to such an extent that, where a waggon                    car
                  THE     FRAGMENTS          OF PAPIAS.                  535

pass with ease, he was not able to pass, no, not even the mass of
his head merely. They say that his eyelids swelled to such an
      t that he could not see the light at all, while as for his eyes
they were not visible even by a physician looking through an
instrument, so far had they sunk from the surface....’
        Compiled from Cramer Catena ad Acta SS. Apost. (1838) p. 12 sq.
           and other sources.

                                     XIX.
     Here   beginneththe argument to the Gospel according   to John.
     The Gospel of John was made known and given to the Churches by
John, while he yet remained in the body; as (one) Papias by name, of
 Hierapolis, a beloved disciple of John, has related in his five exoteric (read
 exegetical) books ;but he wrote down the Gospel at the dictation of John,
 correctly.
                                       A Vatican MS of the ninth century.


                                     XX,
    For, last of these, John, surnamed the Son of Thunder, when he was now
‘avery old man, as Irenzus and Eusebius and a succession of trustworthy
historians have handed down to us, about the time when terrible heresies
had cropped up, dictated the Gospel to his own disciple, the virtuous Papias
of Hierapolis, to fill up what was lacking in those who before him had pro-
claimed the word to the nations throughout all the earth.
                Catena Pair. Graec. in S. Foan. published by B. Corder.
